Below is the solution set to the first chapter from a book I wrote. You can find the original lesson for this chapter here: https://soroush.io/#/my-thoughts/3

**Written by Soroush Saberan**

# Table of Contents

**[Chapter 1: Preliminaries](#chapter-1-preliminaries)**

- [1.1 Review of Set Theory](#11-review-of-set-theory)
  - [1.1.1 Basic Sets](#basic-sets)
  - [1.1.2 Basic Set Operations](#basic-set-operations)
  - [1.1.3 Relations and Functions](#relations-and-functions)
  - [1.1.4 Cardinality](#cardinality)
- [1.2 Review of Modular Arithmetic](#12-review-of-modular-arithmetic)
- [1.3 Introduction to Mathematical Proofs](#13-introduction-to-mathematical-proofs)
  - [1.3.1 Propositional Logic](#propositional-logic)
  - [1.3.2 Predicate Logic](#predicate-logic)
  - [1.3.3 Proof Techniques](#proof-techniques)

# Chapter 1: Preliminaries

## 1.1 Review of Set Theory

## Basic Sets

1. Determine whether the number $\sqrt{8}$ is a member of $\mathbb{Q}$, $\mathbb{R}$, or $\mathbb{C}$. Justify your answers.

   $\sqrt{8} = \sqrt{4*2} = 2\sqrt{2}$ And since we know $\sqrt{2}$ cannot be expressed as a fraction of integers, neither can $2\sqrt{2}$, so $\sqrt{8} \notin \mathbb{Q}$.

   $\sqrt{8} \in \mathbb{R}$ because $2$ and $\sqrt{2}$ are real numbers, and the product of real numbers is a real number.

   $\sqrt{8} \in \mathbb{C}$ because every element in $\mathbb{R}$ is also in $\mathbb{C}$.

2. If $x$ and $y$ are members of $\mathbb{N}$ and $x < y$, can the number $\frac{x}{y}$ be a member of $\mathbb{N}$? What if $x > y$? Justify your answers.

   If $x < y$, then $\frac{x}{y}$ is strictly less than $1$ but greater than $0$, which contains no natural numbers on that interval, so $\frac{x}{y}$ cannot be a member of $\mathbb{N}$.

   If $x > y$, then if we take $x = 2$ and $y = 1$, we see that $\frac{x}{y} = 2 \in \mathbb{N}$.

3. Provide an example of a number that is a member of $\mathbb{C}$ but not a member of $\mathbb{R}$.

   $i$

4. True or False: All members of $\mathbb{Q}$ are also members of $\mathbb{Z}$. Justify your answer.

   False. $\frac{3}{4} \in \mathbb{Q}$ but $\frac{3}{4} \notin \mathbb{Z}$.

5. Provide an example of a number that is a member of $\mathbb{R}$ but not a member of $\mathbb{Q}$.

   $\sqrt{2}$

6. Translate the following into English: $\{ x + y \mid x \in \mathbb{N}, y = 2x \}$

   "The set of all elements $x + y$ such that x is a natural number and $y = 2x$" AKA the set of all positive multiples of $3$, or $\{ 3, 6, 9, ...\}$.

## Basic Set Operations

1. Let $A = \{1, 2, 3, 4, 5\}$, $B = \{4, 5, 6, 7, 8\}$, and $C = \{7, 8, 9, 10\}$. Compute $(A \cup B) \cap C$ and $A \cup (B \cap C)$. Are they equal?

   $(A \cup B) \cap C = \{1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8\} \cap C = \{7, 8\}$

   $A \cup (B \cap C) = A \cup \{7, 8\} = \{1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8\}$

   So they are not equal. In other words, $A \cup B \cap C$ is ambiguous.

2. Given $U = \{1, 2, 3, ..., 10\}$ and $A = \{2, 4, 6, 8, 10\}$, find the complement of $A$ with respect to $U$ and calculate the union of $A$ and its complement.

   $A' \cup A = \{1, 3, 5, 7, 9\} \cup A = \{1, 2, 3, ..., 10\}$

3. Given the sets $P = \{a, b, c\}$ and $Q = \{1, 2, 3\}$. List out the elements in the Cartesian product $P \times Q$.

   $P \times Q = \{(a, 1), (a, 2), (a, 3), (b, 1), (b, 2), (b, 3), (c, 1), (c, 2), (c, 3)\}$

4. Compute the power set of the set $B = \{x, y, z\}$.

   $\mathcal{P}(B) = \{\emptyset, \{x\}, \{y\}, \{z\}, \{x, y\}, \{x, z\}, \{y, z\}, \{x, y, z\}\}$

5. Assume we have a universal set $U = \{a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, j\}$ and we have subsets $A = \{a, b, c, d\}$, $B = \{e, f, g, h\}$, and $C = \{i, j\}$. If $D = (A \cup B)'$, compute $D \cap C$.

   $D \cap C = (A \cup B)' \cap C = \{a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h\}' \cap C = \{i, j\} \cap C = \{i, j\}$

6. Given $A = \{1, 2, 3\}$, $B = \{3, 4, 5\}$, and $C = \{5, 6, 7\}$, find $(A \cup B) - C$.

   $(A \cup B) - C = \{1, 2, 3, 4, 5\} - C = \{1, 2, 3, 4\}$

7. Let $A = \{1, 2\}$, $B = \{3, 4\}$, and $C = \{5, 6\}$. Compute the Cartesian product $A \times B \times C$.

   $A \times B \times C = \{(1, 3, 5), (1, 3, 6), (1, 4, 5), (1, 4, 6), (2, 3, 5), (2, 3, 6), (2, 4, 5), (2, 4, 6)\}$

## Relations and Functions

1. If $A = \{x, y, z\}$ and $B = \{1, 2\}$, give an example of a function from $A$ to $B$ that is not an injection.

   $\{(x, 1), (y, 1), (z, 2)\}$

2. If $A = \{x, y, z\}$ and $B = \{1, 2\}$, give an example of a function from $A$ to $B$ that is not a surjection.

   $\{(x, 1), (y, 1), (z, 1)\}$

3. If $A = \{a, b\}$ and $B = \{1, 2\}$, give an example of a function from $A$ to $B$ that is a bijection.

   $\{(a, 1), (b, 2)\}$

4. True or False: Every bijection has an inverse that is also a bijection. (Given $f(a) = b$, the inverse of $f$, denoted $f^{-1}$, always has the property $f^{-1}(b) = a$)

   True

5. True or False: If a function $f: A \rightarrow B$ has a domain of 5 elements and a codomain of 3 elements, the function cannot be a bijection.

   True

6. Consider three sets $A = \{1, 2\}$, $B = \{3, 4\}$, and $C = \{5, 6\}$. We define three functions $f: A \rightarrow B$, $g: B \rightarrow C$, and $h: C \rightarrow A$ as follows:

   $f$ is defined by $f(1) = 3$ and $f(2) = 4$.

   $g$ is defined by $g(3) = 5$ and $g(4) = 6$.

   $h$ is defined by $h(5) = 1$ and $h(6) = 2$.

   Determine if the function $h \circ g \circ f: A \rightarrow A$ is bijective.

   $(h \circ g \circ f)(1) = 1$ and $(h \circ g \circ f)(2) = 2$ so $h \circ g \circ f$ is a bijection.

## Cardinality

1. Show that the set of integers $\mathbb{Z}$ is countable.

   The following function is a bijection from $\mathbb{N}$ to $\mathbb{Z}$:

   $f(n) = \frac{n}{2}$ if $n$ is even, else $f(n) = -\frac{n+1}{2}$

2. Show that the set of all rational numbers $\mathbb{Q}$ (i.e., fractions of integers) is countable. (Hint: The bijection is not algebraic)

   |     | 1             | 2             | 3             | 4             | 5             | 6             | ... |
   | --- | ------------- | ------------- | ------------- | ------------- | ------------- | ------------- | --- |
   | 1   | $\frac{1}{1}$ | $\frac{1}{2}$ | $\frac{1}{3}$ | $\frac{1}{4}$ | $\frac{1}{5}$ | $\frac{1}{6}$ | ... |
   | 2   | $\frac{2}{1}$ | $\frac{2}{2}$ | $\frac{2}{3}$ | $\frac{2}{4}$ | $\frac{2}{5}$ | $\frac{2}{6}$ | ... |
   | 3   | $\frac{3}{1}$ | $\frac{3}{2}$ | $\frac{3}{3}$ | $\frac{3}{4}$ | $\frac{3}{5}$ | $\frac{3}{6}$ | ... |
   | 4   | $\frac{4}{1}$ | $\frac{4}{2}$ | $\frac{4}{3}$ | $\frac{4}{4}$ | $\frac{4}{5}$ | $\frac{4}{6}$ | ... |
   | 5   | $\frac{5}{1}$ | $\frac{5}{2}$ | $\frac{5}{3}$ | $\frac{5}{4}$ | $\frac{5}{5}$ | $\frac{5}{6}$ | ... |
   | ... | ...           | ...           | ...           | ...           | ...           | ...           | ... |

   We can start our count diagonally in the following way:

   - $1 \rightarrow \frac{1}{1}$

   - $2 \rightarrow \frac{2}{1}$

   - $3 \rightarrow \frac{1}{2}$

   - $4 \rightarrow \frac{1}{3}$

   - We exclude $\frac{2}{2}$ because it's the same as $\frac{1}{1}$

   - $5 \rightarrow \frac{3}{1}$

   - $6 \rightarrow \frac{4}{1}$

   - $7 \rightarrow \frac{3}{2}$

   - $8 \rightarrow \frac{2}{3}$

   - $9 \rightarrow \frac{1}{4}$

   - $10 \rightarrow \frac{1}{5}$

   - We exclude $\frac{2}{4}$ because it's the same as $\frac{1}{2}$

   - ...

   Every rational number will eventually appear in our list. Therefore, the set of all rational numbers is countable.

3. List some elements in $\mathcal{P}(\mathbb{N})$.

   The empty set, and any set of natural numbers, will be in $\mathcal{P}(\mathbb{N})$. For example, the set of all prime numbers is in $\mathcal{P}(\mathbb{N})$. $\mathbb{N}$ is in $\mathcal{P}(\mathbb{N})$. Every set of pythagorean triples is in $\mathcal{P}(\mathbb{N})$. And so on...

4. Using Cantor's Theorem, argue why there must exist infinitely many different sizes of infinity.

   Assume for contradiction that there exist finitely many different sizes of infinity. This implies that there exists a set $\mathbb{X}$ such that the cardinality of $\mathbb{X}$ is greater than all other possible cardinalities. However, by Cantor's Theorem, the cardinality of the set $\mathcal{P}(\mathbb{X})$ must be greater than the cardinality of the set $\mathbb{X}$. So we contradicted our assumption that there exist finitely many different sizes of infinity. Thus, there must exist infinitely many different sizes of infinity.

## 1.2 Review of Modular Arithmetic

1. Perform the following operations in $\mathbb{Z}_{10}$:

   - (a) $7 + 6 \equiv 3 \pmod{10}$
   - (b) $8 - 9 \equiv 9 \pmod{10}$
   - (c) $6 \cdot 7 \equiv 2 \pmod{10}$

2. Check whether the following statements are true or false:

   - (a) $14 \equiv 4 \pmod{5}$ is true
   - (b) $27 \equiv 2 \pmod{5}$ is true
   - (c) $35 \equiv 0 \pmod{7}$ is true

3. Find all $x \in \mathbb{Z}_{7}$ such that $2x = 1$.

   $x = 4$

4. Determine the residue class of 17 modulo 5.

   $[17]_5 = \{..., -8, -3, 2, 7, 12, 17, 22, 27, 32, 37, 42, ...\}$

## 1.3 Introduction to Mathematical Proofs

## Propositional Logic

1. Simplify the following logical expressions using the laws of propositional logic:

   - $\neg (p \lor True) \equiv \neg True \equiv False$
   - $(p \land q) \lor (\neg p \land q) \equiv q \land (p \lor \neg p) \equiv q \land True \equiv q$
   - $\neg ((\neg p \land q) \lor (p \land \neg q))$. Let's break this down: $(\neg p \land q) \lor (p \land \neg q)$ says $p$ and $q$ are different, so the negation of that says $p$ and $q$ are the same. Saying $p$ and $q$ are the same is exactly what the $\iff$ connective says. Thus $\neg ((\neg p \land q) \lor (p \land \neg q)) \equiv p \iff q$.

2. Construct the truth table for the proposition $p \land (\lnot q \lor p)$.

   | $p$ | $q$ | $\lnot q$ | $\lnot q \lor p$ | $p \land (\lnot q \lor p)$ |
   | :-: | :-: | :-------: | :--------------: | :------------------------: |
   |  T  |  T  |     F     |        T         |             T              |
   |  T  |  F  |     T     |        T         |             T              |
   |  F  |  T  |     F     |        F         |             F              |
   |  F  |  F  |     T     |        T         |             F              |

   The columns for $\lnot q$ and $\lnot q \lor p$ are shown for sake of clarity, but are not necessary for the truth table.

3. Show the impliction law is true by writing out its truth table.

   The implication law states that $p \implies q \equiv \neg p \lor q$.

   | $p$ | $q$ | $p \implies q$ | $\neg p$ | $\neg p \lor q$ |
   | --- | --- | -------------- | -------- | --------------- |
   | T   | T   | T              | F        | T               |
   | T   | F   | F              | F        | F               |
   | F   | T   | T              | T        | T               |
   | F   | F   | T              | T        | T               |

## Predicate Logic

1. Translate the following English sentences into predicate logic.

   a. All dogs bark.

   If $D(x)$ denotes "$x$ is a dog" and $B(x)$ denotes "$x$ barks", we can express this as: $\forall x (D(x) \implies B(x))$.

   b. There exists a cat that does not meow.

   If $C(x)$ denotes "$x$ is a cat" and $M(x)$ denotes "$x$ meows", we can express this as: $\exists x(C(x) \land \neg M(x))$

   c. No student is perfect.

   If $S(x)$ denotes "$x$ is a student" and $P(x)$ denotes "$x$ is perfect", we can express this as: $\forall x(S(x) \implies \neg P(x))$

2. Translate the following predicate logic statements into English, assuming $G(x)$ is "$x$ is a genius", $T(x)$ is "$x$ is a teacher", and $S(x)$ is "$x$ is a student".

   a. $\exists x (G(x) \land T(x))$

   "There exists at least one individual who is both a genius and a teacher."

   b. $\forall x (S(x) \implies \neg G(x))$

   "For all individuals, if they are a student, then they are not a genius."

## Proof Techniques

1. Prove that the sum of two odd integers is an even integer. (Direct Proof)

   Let $a = 2n + 1$ and $b = 2m + 1$ where $n$ and $m$ are any integer values. We want to show that $a + b = 2k$ where k is an integer value. We express odd and even integers this way because any odd integer can be represented as $2n + 1$, and any even integer can be represented as $2n$, for some integer $n$.

   Then, the sum of the two odd numbers is:

   $$ (2n + 1) + (2m + 1) = 2n + 2m + 1 + 1 = 2n + 2m + 2 = 2(n + m + 1)$$

   So if we let $k = n + m + 1$, we have shown that $a + b = 2k$. Therefore, the sum of two odd numbers is an even number.

2. Prove that there exists an irrational number $x$ between any two distinct rational numbers $a$ and $b$. (Direct / Constructive Proof)

   Assume $b > a$. It is easy to find a _rational_ number $x$ between any two distinct rational numbers $a$ and $b$. Just let $x = \frac{a + b}{2}$. So let's make $x$ irrational in a way that ensures it maintains the property $a < x < b$. One way to make $x$ irrational while maintaining the property $a < x < b$ is to add a suitably scaled irrational number to it. Let's use the well-known irrational number $\sqrt{2}$ and consider $x' = x + \frac{\sqrt{2}}{n}$, where $n$ is a positive integer large enough that $\frac{\sqrt{2}}{n} < \frac{b - a}{2}$. Since the sum of a rational number and an irrational number is irrational, it's clear that $x'$ is irrational. Next, we need to find an $n$ satisfying the equation $\frac{\sqrt{2}}{n} < \frac{b - a}{2}$. We can find such an $n$ by solving the equation $\frac{\sqrt{2}}{n} = \frac{b - a}{3}$, since $\frac{b - a}{2} > \frac{b - a}{3}$.

   $$
   \frac{\sqrt{2}}{n} = \frac{b - a}{3} \implies 3\sqrt{2} = n(b - a) \implies n = \frac{3\sqrt{2}}{b - a}
   $$

   But since $n$ has to be rational, we instead let $n = \left \lceil \frac{3\sqrt{2}}{b - a}\right \rceil$. Thus we have found an irrational number ($x'$) between two arbitrary distinct rational numbers $a$ and $b$, which means there exists an irrational number between any two distinct rational numbers $a$ and $b$.

3. Prove that there exists a digit $n$ that appears infinitely many times in the decimal expansion of $\sqrt{2}$. (Non-Constructive Proof / Proof by Contradiction)

   Assume for contradiction that each digit $0, 1, 2, ..., 9$ appears finitely many times in the decimal expansion of $\sqrt{2}$. This means $0$ appears $a$ times, $1$ appears $b$ times, $2$ appears $c$ times, ..., and $9$ appears $j$ times. But this would mean the decimal expansion of $\sqrt{2}$ has $a + b + c + ... + j$ digits, and therefore has finitely many digits, which is impossible since $\sqrt{2}$ is irrational. Thus our assumption must be wrong and there must exist at least one digit $n$ that appears infinitely many times in the decimal expansion of $\sqrt{2}$.

4. Prove that there is no smallest positive rational number. (Proof by Contradiction)

   Assume for contradiction that there exists a smallest positive rational number $n$. Then $\frac{n}{2}$ must exist and also be a positive rational number. But $\frac{n}{2} < n$, which means $n$ is not the smallest positive rational number, contradicting our assumption. So our assumption must be wrong and there is no smallest positive rational number.

5. Prove that if $n^3 + 5$ is odd, then $n$ is even. (Proof by Contrapositive)

   Assume that $n$ is odd. We want to show that $n^3 + 5$ is even. Since $n$ is odd, we can write $n$ as $2k+1$ for some integer $k$.

   $$
   n^3 + 5 = (2k+1)^3 + 5 = 8k^3 + 12k^2 + 6k + 1 + 5 = 2(4k^3 + 6k^2 + 3k + 3)
   $$

   $4k^3 + 6k^2 + 3k + 3$ must be an integer since the integers are closed under addition and multiplication. So we can write $n^3 + 5$ as $2m$ where $m$ is some integer, meaning that $n^3 + 5$ must be even. And since "$n$ is odd" $\implies$ "$n^3 + 5$ is even", then the contrapositive must be true as well.

6. Prove that $1^2 + 2^2 + 3^2 + \ldots + n^2 = \frac{n(n+1)(2n+1)}{6}$ for all natural numbers $n$. (Proof by Weak Induction)

   **Base Case**: We'll begin with the case where $n = 1$.

   The left side of the equation is $1^2 = 1$ and the right side of the equation is $\frac{1(1+1)(2*1+1)}{6} = \frac{1(2)(3)}{6} = 1$.

   Since both sides are equal for $n = 1$, the statement holds true for $n = 1$.

   **Inductive Step**: Assume the formula holds true for an arbitrary positive integer $k$. That is,

   $$1^2 + 2^2 + 3^2 + \ldots + k^2 = \frac{k(k+1)(2k+1)}{6}$$

   So, for $n = k+1$, the equation becomes

   $$
   1^2 + 2^2 + 3^2 + \ldots + k^2 + (k+1)^2 \stackrel{?}{=} \frac{(k+1)((k+1)+1)(2(k+1)+1)}{6} = \frac{(k+1)(k+2)(2k+3)}{6}
   $$

   Using our inductive assumption, we can replace $1^2 + 2^2 + 3^2 + \ldots + k^2$ with $\frac{k(k+1)(2k+1)}{6}$, which gives us:

   $$
   \frac{k(k+1)(2k+1)}{6} + (k+1)^2 \stackrel{?}{=} \frac{(k+1)(k+2)(2k+3)}{6}
   $$

   Factoring out $(k+1)$, this becomes

   $$
   (k+1)[\frac{k(2k+1)}{6} + (k+1)] \stackrel{?}{=} \frac{(k+1)(k+2)(2k+3)}{6}
   $$

   Simplifying the inside of the brackets gives

   $$
   (k+1)[\frac{2k^2+k}{6} + k+1] \stackrel{?}{=} \frac{(k+1)(k+2)(2k+3)}{6}
   $$

   Multiplying through by $\frac{6}{6}$ gives

   $$
   \frac{(k+1)[2k^2+k+6k+6]}{6} \stackrel{?}{=} \frac{(k+1)(k+2)(2k+3)}{6}
   $$

   Simplifying

   $$
   \frac{(k+1)(k+2)(2k+3)}{6} \stackrel{?}{=} \frac{(k+1)(k+2)(2k+3)}{6}
   $$

   Which is in fact true.

7. Prove that every integer greater than or equal to $2$ is either a prime or a product of primes. (Proof by Strong Induction)

   **Base Case**:

   Our base case is $2$, which is prime, so the statement is true for $n=2$.

   **Inductive Step**:

   Assume that the statement is true for all integers $k$ such that $2 \leq k < n$ for some integer $n > 2$. This is our inductive hypothesis.

   We have two cases for $n$:

   1. $n$ is prime. In this case, there is nothing to prove.

   2. $n$ is not prime. Since $n$ is not a prime number, it must have a factor $a$ such that $2 \leq a < n$. Consequently, $n$ can be written as $n = a * b$ for some integer $b$.

      By our inductive hypothesis, since $a < n$ and $a \geq 2$, $a$ is a product of primes.

      Furthermore, $b < n$ because $a \geq 2$. So by our inductive hypothesis, $b$ is also a product of primes.

      Therefore, $n = a * b$ is the product of primes, because it is the product of two numbers that are themselves products of primes (or are prime).

8. Prove that for all integers n, the number n is even if and only if the number 7n + 4 is even. (Bi-conditional proof)

   **($\implies$): If $n$ is even, then $7n + 4$ is even**

   Assume that $n$ is even. By the definition of an even number, $n = 2k$ for some integer $k$. Then we can express $7n + 4$ as follows:

   $7n + 4 = 7(2k) + 4 = 14k + 4 = 2(7k + 2)$

   Since $7k + 2$ is an integer, $7n + 4$ is even.

   **($\impliedby$): If $7n + 4$ is even, then $n$ is even**

   Assume that $7n + 4$ is even. So we can express it as $7n + 4 = 2m$ for some integer $m$.

   Rearranging this gives $7n = 2m - 4$.

   This can be expressed as $7n = 2(m - 2)$.

   In order for $n$ to be even, we need it to be a multiple of 2, or $n = 2k$ for some integer $k$.

   But, $7n$ is clearly a multiple of 2, and since 7 is not a multiple of 2, it must be that $n$ is a multiple of 2, or in other words, $n$ is even.

   So we have shown both directions of the bi-conditional.
